hello mass fans hello everyone again
sorry for the technical issues as I
mentioned before if you happen to catch
the weird frozen picture and whatever
was going on you would think by the 7th
time doing this I would know what I'm
doing
maybe I do maybe I think it was just the
Internet it was whatever I tried to do I
was coming up all frozen and God knows
what was going on but anyway we're here
well I've I'm still gonna do an hour
don't worry if you have to leave early
you can always watch it again tomorrow
where I'll go on my channel so the plan
today then is talk about probability
which is to coincide with the latest and
final Tom rocks mass appeal video that
we released on Monday which was looking
at probability tree diagrams and as most
of the questions that I got from you all
were a bit more general about
probability I figured I'm not just going
to let it to tree diagrams we're just
going to talk all things probability and
answer some interesting questions
basically and this one possibly will be
a bit more advanced maybe than some of
the others we shall see
so as usual I'll answer some of the
questions I've been sent already first
and then I'll open it up to the live
chat for the last 20 minutes or so I
think and then so if you have any
questions at all you can drop them in
the chat box and I'll answer them live
in the second half of the street so the
first question I got then this one came
in from James let's go to check my notes
James and James asked a really
interesting question which was if you
were to roll a pair of dice a hundred
times what is the average score that you
would get now I actually did this very
experiment and maybe James this is why
you asked this question because in one
of my videos that I made a couple of
quite a while ago now I was looking at I
talked about how to use maths to improve
your performance at the board game
Monopoly and one of the ways to do that
was to look at the probability of the
number you're most likely to roll when
you have two dice and
you can think about it is going is as
follows so I have two dice so the
numbers I could roll will range from two
ones which will be two so if I rolled a
1 and a 1 then I would get 2 I could of
course get 3 I could get a total of 4 5
6 7 8 9 10 11 if I got two sixes and was
super lucky I'd get the 12 so not quite
all the numbers because we start at 2
rather than starting at 1 but these are
all of the possibilities of numbers they
could roll with 2 dice and the perhaps
the easiest way to see what number
you're going to get you could go do this
experiment as I said as I said in my
Monopoly video I literally roll a
hundred dice and I film it all on my
GoPro I'm wearing on my head so you can
see me do the experiment live and it's
gonna look like what we're gonna see
here but the way you can see what you're
expecting is just by considering how you
can get those numbers so what do you
have to roll on your to dice to get a -
there's only one way you can get a - it
has to be a 1 on dice number 1 and a 1
and dice number 2 so you can only get
this from 1+1 now if you're trying to
get a total of 3 you could get a 1 on
dice number 1 or you could get a 2 on
dice number 1 and then you would need to
get correspondingly a 2 on dice number 2
or a 1 on dice number 2 so you would
need to get here you've got two options
one on dice 1 and 2 on dice 2 or 2
hyundais 1 and 1 on dice - so I'm just
going to draw a line here to separate
these out to help us a bit with our
picture so let me just draw all the
lines in so now for the next one we can
get 4 so we're going to continue with
the same idea how can you get a 4 when
you're rolling two dice so you can get 2
and 2 you could get you could get 3 and
1 and you could get 1 and 3
so there are three ways to get a four
for a five we're going to get a three
and two you could get two and three you
could get four and one or you could get
wore six same idea three and three
I could have four and two I could have
five and one I could go down to a two
and four kind of 1 and a 5 7 3 & 4 4 & 3
6 & 1 1 & 6 5 & 2 2 & 5 now so we've got
one way to get to two ways to get three
three ways to get four ball ways to get
five highways to get six six ways to get
seven so it looks like it's good to just
keep increasing increasing increasing
now eight this could be so I can't have
anything with a 1 is the thing to think
about here so if we were to do 1 plus 7
of course that would give us 8 where you
can't get 7 on a dice so we can't have a
war but we could have a 2 with a 6 we
could have a 3 with a 5 a 4 with a 4 a 5
with a 3 or 6 with the two and that's it
so we've sort of we've been increasing
in the number of ways on two dice to get
the number until you get number 8 and
then it started to decrease again and
the patterns going to continue so 9 you
can get a three and a six for under five
five and a four six and A three 10 you
can get five and five six and four four
and six eleven five and six six and five
and twelve six and six
so just based on the number of different
roles this is actually giving you
exactly the shape of your probability
distribution so if you were to conduct
this experiment a hundred times you
would expect to get a seven in how many
total ways that we got here 1 plus so 1
3 6 10 15 730 so there were 36
different combinations that we can get
there I think one so it's 3 6 10
it's definitely 15 that's another 50 yes
so that is 36 in total so out of so to
get a 7 that's 6 out of 36 so if you did
that times 100 that would equal your
expected number of sevens in your 100
expected number Seven's
in 100 rolls and then you could do this
for all the others so obviously this
one's 5 out of 36 times 100 etc etc so
in short James that is what you would
expect to get if you roll the dice 100
times of course with probability just
because you expect to get a particular
value what that means is that we are we
conduct the experiment over and over
again we would tend towards this
distribution so if we were to roll the
dice an infinite number of times or
let's say 10 billion times then it would
almost perfectly have this shape but if
you're doing it for a smaller number
then it might not look quite look right
so for a hundred I think in my
experiment with a hundred I correctly
either 6 or 8 2 actually came out to be
the most popular score but if I had
carried on and done a thousand rolls
I think you'd start to see 7 being the
most popular score that you would get
with your two dice all right so a nice
practical question to kick us off thank
you for that one James
now the next one this next one's
brilliant and one of my favorite
questions I've actually sort of ever
been asked so well at least the way I've
interpreted it and I hope you'll agree
with me this is going to be super super
fun bit of probability theory that we're
going to do so
Gauss asked me about betting strategies
so whenever this happens all the time if
you're a mathematician you're a
mathematician and you say you're going
to talk about probability people always
ask you about betting strategies because
they they assume that as a mathematician
you know some fancy trick and that means
you're going to be able to win money
doing
from betting and various other things
now my first tip were here to say would
be the whole sort of idea behind
gambling and betting is that the casinos
or the bookmakers they already know all
of the maths and so they purposefully
design it so that they always have an
advantage over you as the punter so
first of all right you know gambling can
be quite fun for sure right but you
definitely shouldn't do it to actually
try and make money because you're
actually on purpose the rules of the
game are stacked against you
doesn't mean you won't win but you are
actually playing a less than 50% chance
of winning on whatever game you're
playing so get out the sensible stuff
out the way now to do the fun math
problem so guys asked me about betting
strategies and though it was a very long
list in the very like detailed email
about various different things but one
of the ones that he mentioned that I
wanted to pick up on was the idea of
playing roulette let's say and this idea
of you just if you lose you just bet
double next time and eventually you will
win some amount of money so this is like
a standard age old betting strategy in
theory it will work right but we're
going to do some calculations and I'm
going to convince you that it's not
actually a very good idea because in
practice of course we have a limited
amount of money limited amount of time
limited amount of games and that kind of
sort of shifts the the scale a bit
against you and we'll see now so the
first way to think about it is okay so
the idea is I'm gonna start with some
amount of money so let's suppose the
total amount of money I have available
to me is going to be one thousand and
twenty three pounds so it's a pretty big
amount of money right so definitely I'm
not sure I actually have a thousand
trade three spare pounds that I could go
and gamble with but let's suppose I do
for the purpose of this parameter one
thousand twenty three pounds that I can
gamble but obviously I can't bet beyond
that because I don't have enough cash to
be able to do that and the idea is we're
going to be playing roulette as I
mentioned so we're playing roulette
and what we're going to assume is that
there is a 50/50 chance so 50% chance of
winning by betting on red or black now
if any of you know anything about
roulette or have ever played roulette if
you are old enough in your respective
country you'll know that on the wheel
this is the one where you have the ball
and you put it in it spins around the
wheel so it can land anywhere between
numbers 0 to 36 on this wheel and so 18
of the numbers are red 18 are black and
then 0 is green so when you're playing
roulette and you're betting on red or
black your odds as I said are
purposefully less than 50% because of
the green because if you're betting red
or black hands on green you lose no
matter what your bet was so in practice
again the odds are less than 50% but
let's suppose our roulette wheel or
imaginary roulette wheel has just red
and black so we have a 50% chance of
winning now if I was to bet one pound so
you start by betting one pound and then
if I win I win I get two pounds back so
I win one pound and then that's sort of
like a win for that streak now if you
were to lose the idea is you start
betting one pound then our strategy
would say if I lose I now need to bet
two pounds in the next game and if I won
in this game then I would get four
pounds back because I double my money
but I've already put in three because
I've got the one that I lost plus the
two that I bet so my total winnings if I
won on round two my total winnings would
be one pound so let's write that so this
is like round number I guess and then
this is total winnings total win so I
bet one pound and then I won my total
winnings I'd get one I get two pounds
back so I'd win a pound if I won on this
round remember I would get four pound
back but I'd already bet two plus the
one I lost
so I'd win
one power if I lost I'd go and I'd bet
four pounds I'd get eight pounds back if
I win but I've already now bet four plus
two plus one I've already bet seven so
I'm winning one pound again and this
pattern continues so you'd then bet
eight pounds can't draw pound signs
you've then bet 1632 etc pattern would
continue and in each case your total
winnings if you won on that particular
round following this strategy would be
one pound so whilst in theory you could
keep doing this forever and just double
your bet and you know sort of I guess a
lot of probability say eventually you
would win on this game where it is 50/50
the problem is you're only actually
winning one pound because you've made so
many bets up to the point where you
finally double your money that you
actually your total winnings is only a
pound from what you've your outlay has
been so what this means is if you were
to get so remember we have a maximum
amount so to get up to this you actually
have to lose 10 bets in a row right so
this would be this is losing one bet
you're betting two pounds losing two
bets you bet this so if you keep going
you're eventually gonna have to bet 512
pounds
eventually you will bet 512 pounds and
you'd still be only winning one pound
but this would be the furthest we could
go along given that the max amount of
money I have is one thousand and twenty
three cuz I'd be betting 512 in round so
this would be after ten losing bets I'd
be betting 512 pounds but I'd already
lost 511 up to that point so if I were
to lose ten times in a row that's me out
I've got no money left whatsoever can't
continue and I've lost 1024 pounds 1,000
23 pounds it's obviously pretty terrible
so then it seems quite unlikely though
perhaps to have 10 losing bets in a row
right so you can work out that
probability in fact you can
ten losing bets in a row so if you lose
one bet you have a half chance of losing
the first bet
then you need to lose the second bet
which has probability 1/2 then you need
to lose the third the fourth the fifth
so you need to lose 1/2 times 1/2 times
1/2 10 times so your probability of
losing all of my money 10 losing bets in
a row probability of that is 1/2 to the
power 10 which is equal to 1 divided by
1024 that's what it turns into
so the chance of me losing my 1000 and
23 pounds the chance of me losing all my
money is less than one in a thousand so
pretty small like naught point one
percent chance that I would lose all my
money however as I've said so that seems
good that's like a good thing that you
know I'm there's a very small chance I'm
gonna lose all my money however remember
that if at any point I win I only win
one pound so well maybe I only want to
win one pound but like if you're into
your gambling and you're trying to earn
some money through it all you know you
trying to win big you want to win more
than a pound right so perhaps that
almost like the lowest amount you would
want to win if I'm saying I'm willing to
bet a thousand and 23 pounds you could
kind of see like some logic in saying I
want to at least double my money if I'm
willing to put a thousand pounds of my
own money on the line I'm only gonna do
that if there's a chance that I could
like I'm gonna gonna do that if there's
a chance I could double my money let's
suppose so I want to double my money so
given that in each sequence of doubling
my bets given that if I win at any point
I only win one pound I actually need to
win 1,024 sequences or so I want the
husband in 23 sequences to double my
money right so that could happen at any
point maybe in the first run-through I
win on round 1 and I get my womp
and then they go back and start again on
round one and maybe the next time I win
on round three
I bet four pounds I win I get eight back
but overall I'm still only one pound up
so if I'm gonna win if I'm gonna double
my money so to double money I need to
win one thousand and twenty three
sequences in a row all right so this is
what we're aiming to calculate now what
is the probability of me winning one
thousand and twenty three sequences in a
row so we know the probability of me
losing so this is the probability of me
losing one sequence is one divided by
1024 so the probability of me winning is
one minus that so the probability of
winning a single sequence win one
sequence is one minus that so that's one
thousand and twenty three divided by
1024 right that's the probability of
winning one single sequence just before
I run out of money so that's pretty
likely that I win a sequence but if I
need to win one thousand and twenty
three in a row to double my money right
because I cannot lose a single one
because as soon as I lose a single one
of these sequences I'm out of cash
because I've already lost everything
that I started with so I have to win
each so each the probability of winning
one sequence is 1025-1029 s events so we
just multiply that probability to the
power one thousand and twenty three so
the probability of me doubling my money
winning one thousand and twenty three in
a row probability of double money from
my 1023 starting point
is this ^ 1023 because I've gotta win
one thousand and twenty three sequences
now if you know anything about her
probabilities whilst the probability is
really good when it's to the power one
as we start raising it to a larger and
larger power it's a number less than one
and when you raise a number less than
one to higher and higher powers the
number gets smaller and smaller and
smaller so this in fact will to about
I'm gonna have to look I calculated this
earlier this is equal to thirty six
point eight percent or naught point
three six eight this is naught point
three six a approximately so the
probability of me doubling my money
through this method of betting that will
amounts each time where I have a limited
amount of capital which is true I think
for everybody no one in the world has an
infinite amount of money even
billionaires
so the probability be doubling my money
through this method is nor point three
six eight right so that doesn't seem
terrible it's a pretty good chance but
the perhaps the most interesting thing
about this I think that in itself is
quite interesting that it's quite as
perhaps lower than you think that you're
going to double your money before you
lose everything but the other
interesting thing is if I had just gone
back to the very very beginning and I
had just best bested 1023 pounds in
round one so I went back to round one
and I just put a bet on one thousand and
twenty three pounds on let's say on red
what is my chance of doubling my money
betting one thousand and twenty three
pounds on red it's fifty percent so this
if I just do that on red this
probability is equal to naught point
five and naught point five is bigger
than or point three six eight so
ultimately if my goal if my goal was to
starting with
23 pounds and all I want to do is double
my money
you're actually better off definitely do
not recommend it but you're better off
putting it all on red or black at the
beginning then you are trying to win a
thousand and twenty three games in a row
one thousand twenty three sequences in a
row or each time you double and only win
one pound so whilst it isn't necessarily
a gambling strategy it does show you
that sort of this method isn't quite as
clever as people think which is why I
quite liked this particular calculation
and the other really interesting
question other really is a thing to spot
here is this probability down here so
the more the more money you want to win
as you want to so say so doubling my
money I wanted to win ten thousand
pounds or I wanted to win a million
pounds then what you're going to do is
you're going to change the numbers here
right so if I wanted so the probability
of winning let's think about this if we
write this algebraically the probability
of winning winning let's say n pounds so
remember if we are successful in our
sequence then we win one pound so I want
to win n pounds I have to win n times in
a row so the probability of winning n
pounds is equal to so what's that going
to be now that's going to be so what did
we say last time our probability for one
so this is 1023 that's what I want to
win so we did one - and then it was hang
on so it should be one minus one over N
to the N okay it should look like that I
think if we have to do this so the
probability of winning n pounds looks
like 1 minus 1 over n to the power N and
this
as n tends to infinity so as you want to
win more and more money is equal to a
very famous number does anybody have any
idea what this do as n tends to infinity
so we want to know I'll write it up at
the top so we want the limit as n goes
to infinity 1 minus 1 over N to the N
yeah that's what I mean yeah that is
what I want yes nice ok yes 1 over e
it's indeed equal to 1 divided by E is
this limit so it looks very similar to
the the formula for e so I've talked
about the formula for e before so if you
change this to a plus here the answer is
e but if you change this one to a minus
then it goes to 1 over E and the reason
is the way you can see this try to think
how I might show this so if you say
right so let's let's think about how you
might calculate this because I think
it's quite a fun question so let's call
this you call this Y so I so I'm trying
to find this unknown value Y and what
I'm gonna do is what am I gonna do here
I think I'm gonna take logs so I'm gonna
say that the log of Y is going to be
equal to so by taking logs I bring the
power down so that's gonna be equal to
log of nope so not ok then n times limit
of as n goes to infinity of n times log
1 minus 1 at the end like that right so
I think that'll still hold I'm using
some results about continuity and
algebra of limits
stuff don't worry if you have no idea
I'm talking about those of you who are
more advanced possibly will so if I take
logs of both sides and then now what do
I want to do now I'm going to I'm gonna
take the N and I'm gonna put it on the
denominator like that because now yes
because now if I let n go to infinity in
this formula the numerator so then goes
to infinity this goes to zero so I've
got log of 1 which is zero and then my
denominator is 1 divided by n so as n
goes to infinity 1 over infinity also
goes to zero so this limit is zero
divided by zero now who knows how to
deal with limits when you have zero
divided by zero there's a special
technique or a special tool that we want
to use here we've got 0/0 in a limit
yes awesome me naps hard slash maths
Thank You hopital's rule yes we want to
use l'hopital's rule so la Portales rule
tells really useful technique when
you've got zero divided by zero or
infinity divided by infinity you
differentiate top and the bottom
as separate functions and the limit is
unchanged this is how it allows you to
calculate these tricky limits so we use
l'hopital's rule the tao tells us that
this is equal to the derivative of the
top to differentiate your log so we've
still got the limit doing this infinity
differentiate the log and that will give
you what we're gonna get 1 over 1 minus
1 over N and then chain rule some
differentiate respect to N so chain rule
on minus 1 over N that's going to give
me minus becomes so that's gonna be a
plus 1 over N squared I think and then
the denominator gives me a minus 1 over
N squared ok so that's equal to that
can we get anywhere with this let's have
a look right so what do I want to do now
so I have to look at my notes to remind
myself what we want to what we trying to
do here so I think if we just simplify
it in fact we'll get what we want
I hope so if we simplify this obviously
these two just cancel and give me the -
so I've got the limit as n goes to
infinity of minus 1 over 1 minus 1 over
N yeah that'll work
so now when I let n go to infinity this
term goes to 0 so it just becomes minus
1 divided by 1 which is minus 1 so this
is minus 1 so going back to where we
started
what have I got I've got log of Y is
minus 1 so if i exponentiate both sides
therefore y is equal to e to the minus
one which is what we were trying to show
in the very first place there we go so
very nice application of lava tiles rule
to show that and remember this was the
the probability of trying to win n
pounds so if you're going to use this
method if you lose your bet so you make
consecutive bets and if you lose you
double your money each time if you want
to win whatever amount of money you want
to win the probability will tend to 1
over e so that's not actually a very
good winning percentage it's like naught
point three six or something right there
probably enough talking about gambling
but a great question from gas or at
least I muddled in somewhere of him
talking about betting strategies I hope
I've convinced you not to use that
betting strategy gas because you do want
to just double your money as I said to
spent everything on red in the first
place
have more of a chance of winning and
then using that strategy right now
something a great question that I got
from Sophie yes this one was from safety
which is going to be a very very fun
thing to restore discussed was to ask
about what is a probability distribution
so in the video with Bobby and Susan we
just talked about different events and
probability of an outcome and then we
constructed a probability tree and sort
of talked about how you interpret a
probability tree now for what you would
do for more complicated sort of
situations you want to model you would
actually try and use a probability
distribution so this is some way of
describing the the structure of the
underlying probability of a particular
event so the best example or the the
best sort of one I can mention cuz we've
already sort of sort of seen it when we
looked at the the rolling of the dice
and we looked at rolling two dice and I
said you're going to get this sort of
bell-shaped curve that was in fact a
normal distribution so one of the most
standard probability distributions
is the normal distribution so this is an
example of a continuous probability
distribution so it models continuous
data
so usually classic example would be
something like hi if you're measuring
the height across a population or maybe
the weight across a population or other
things that have like a continuous
measure rather than a discrete one two
or three you can actually have any
number in between so a normal
distribution you say that your variable
X is normally distributed so this just
means belongs to a normal distribution
with mean mu and variance Sigma squared
this is how you would you need to know
both of these parameters to be able to
describe the particular normal
distribution and the way they appear in
your plot in your data is you have your
center here this is a mu this is x
equals mu in the middle and then all of
your data points would be centered
around the mean so the function itself
looks something like this and decays
away these are decaying away toward zero
they go to 0 in the limit as we go to
infinity plus or minus infinity I just
realize that's incredibly not straight
let me draw it again try and make my
axes a bit straighter all right take two
all right I think that looks a bit
better I can't see if it's straight when
I'm drawing it and then when I look at
the screen I realize this how bad I'm
drawing my graphs so let's go with that
right so that's our normal distribution
and as I said this is centered at x
equals mu along here and the other
parameter is this variance right some mu
is the mean the average and the variance
comes into it by thinking about the
function I've plotted so what I plotted
here is the probability density function
so this is the PDF and what the PDF
looks like for a normal is
f X of X is equal to 1 over root 2 Pi
Sigma squared which is just a constant
at times e to the minus 1 over 2 Sigma
squared X minus mu squared right so
that's the function I plotted so X here
is the variable X is the variable that's
my data point and this is telling me
that I've got an exponential which is it
looks like an e to the minus something
squared we think about the shape of that
that describes why it has this shape
that's what an e to the minus x squared
graph looks like but then we've shifted
the center to be at MU because this is 0
exactly the maximum here is when this is
0 so that occurs when x is new and then
the other interesting factor is let's
get a different color if we look here at
this thing outside the front this 1 over
2 Sigma squared because what that is
telling you is sort of approximately the
bits here so if you were to kind of
approximate this distance when things
get really small in these tails so these
bits are like their probability density
is very low right they're not very high
along the axis so this is kind of like
you can think of this as how likely that
value is that's not an exact
interpretation but it's a useful thing
to keep in mind so the values near the
mean are very very likely and as you
move away they are less likely and what
you can say is that beyond sort of the
bit where it goes really flat this
distance here is approximately 2 Sigma
squared as is that distance so what it's
telling you for a normal distribution
you're saying I'm expecting most of my
values of x IE if you're doing Heights
you're saying I expect most people to be
around the average value and to be
within 2 variance
of this midpoint or within two standard
deviations of the midpoint in fact is
that so
hang on yes I can say that I think yeah
I think that's about 2 Sigma squared
yeah do I mean that I don't mean x
squared it might be root 2 Sigma in fact
either way the idea is that this
distance here it's like how much you
spread away from your mean and this is
given by approximately this term here so
this will be one type probability
distribution and this is what you would
see for your rolling of the dice right
so here you'd have seven so this would
be X with sorry mu in the middle here
would be say centered on seven and then
down here you'd have 12 and down here
you'd have two and this is what your
data would look like for rolling the
dice thousands upon thousands of times
right so that was our first probability
distribution Saifi um the next one I
want to talk about let's think of let's
do the binomial so a lots and lots of
different probability distributions but
let's think about the binomial
distribution and the reason I want to
talk about the binomial is because in
this week's QA on property that Bobby
and Susan recorded that'll be released
tomorrow
by the way so don't worry in case you
thought you'd missed it that's coming
out tomorrow and so in that Q&A Bobby
was actually asked a question about the
binomial distribution so I thought I'd
go into a bit more detail about what it
is seeing as it fits in with sofi's
question about can you explain what
distributions are so the binomial and
just get my notes to check I'm gonna I'm
gonna explain this you say that you have
so lightly hard with the normal no
normal you say X is binomial and usually
you need two parameters you need K and n
are your two parameters and what you're
interested in knowing not KN n N&P sorry
thinking about my geometric NP and
you're interested in knowing with the
binomial is what is the probability of
getting K successes we'll talk about
what that means in a minute k successes
in n trials and the P is the probability
of a success so this is what the proper
binomial distribution describes
probability of success so k successes in
n trials so the classic example here is
about rolling a dice so let's think
about that sort of talk through what
this thing might look like before I just
give you the formula and so we are
rolling a dice n times all right so this
is the same n so we need to know how
many times we're doing it so we're gonna
roll the dice and rolls and we're
interested in we're going to call a
success means getting a six because we
all want to get sixes all right you all
want to get move six spaces if you
playing a board game so you can win
faster we want to get six so a success
is getting a six so P the probability of
a success probability of getting a six
in this example it's just 1/6 so P is
going to be 1/6 to get a 6 and so what
you can ask then is in a certain number
of rolls and rolls
how many sixes am I expecting to get
that's ultimately what this is saying so
it's saying K successes in n trials so K
successes is K rolls of a six out of a
total of n so if I were to use this dice
example the binomial distribution tells
me how many sixes I expect to get if I
were to roll the dice end times so if we
were to just think of let's say a what
can I say here let's do and the
probability of getting so let's say that
n is 6 that's actually put in
today so let's say I'm gonna roll a dice
six times how many sixes do I expect to
get right so there's a few different
ways of thinking about this so one of
the ways might be to say well so I'm
rolling dice six times so I could if I
wanted to say what's the probability
that I get 1/6 so in my six rolls while
the chances of me getting 1/6 so I'm
gonna get 1/6 then I need to get a six
once which has probability 1/6 of
occurring but if I'm only limiting
myself to get 1/6 then the other 5
mustn't be not be sixes so they can be
anything else but they cannot be a six
so there's so I need to get on my second
roll let's say I need to get something
isn't a six so there are five different
things I could get out of the six oh
there's a 5/6 chance but I don't get a
six and that needs to happen five times
because I'm only going to get 1/6 out of
all of my six rolls and then you would
go through and work out for all of the
others so the probability that x equals
2 I need to get 2 sixes so I need to get
1/6 I need to get it again and then for
the other four I need to not get a 6 and
we can continue on in the same way and
there's a pattern to these numbers
because the next one would be have a
think yourselves what you do next one
might be but it's going to follow the
same pattern so I need to get three
sixes so probability x equals three so
I've got to get three sixes each one has
probability 1 over 6 so that's 1/6 cubed
and on the other three I need to not get
a 6 5 6 cubed so what this is actually
telling you is that the probability our
characters put us up here the
probability that x equals K is 1/6
to the K one two three one two three
so it's 1/6 to the K times 1 minus 1/6
to the N minus K right because here n is
6 and P is 1/6 so this is 1 minus 1/6 to
the N minus K to the 6 minus 1 is 5 to
the 6 minus 2 is 4 6 minus 3 is 3 so the
total probability then in fact if my
probability is P its PK times I need 1
minus P n minus K times and that would
fit with these formulas now there's
something I've missed out from these
formulas I'm very wary in case in case
any of you spotted this no one's
mentioned it yet but I have on purpose
missed something out from these formulas
what have I not yet considered
you're right Oscar it's the binomial
coefficient but as you then said sorry
as then meanness is then added it's the
combinations because what I've not
accounted for here is the position of
where I roll my six so what here this
six could occur in the first position it
could occur in the second position the
third the fourth the fifth or the sixth
and they're all the same so it's
actually there are six different ways
for that to happen now for this one
we've got we need to get two sixes so I
could have two sixes at the beginning
two at the end
two in the middle maybe one at the
beginning one at the end so there's lots
of different combinations of how I can
arrange those two objects and if you
have any combinatorics experience you're
actually doing a counting and choosing
problem which is six choose two so what
the full coefficient looks like or what
the full formula looks like is you also
need to account for all of the
combinations which is this binomial
coefficient n choose K and this
coefficient is equal to various
factorials so we have n choose K is
equal to n factorial divided by K
factorial minus K factorial so for the
example when we had K equal to one when
K was equal to one we said what did we
say
we were thinking an N was six wasn't it
so we were doing six choose one and we
said that there were six different
positions it could be in so if we were
to now figure that out that's just going
to be six factorial over 1 factorial
times 5 factorial which is six times
five and Scott times one divided by one
and then times five times four times
one so they're all going to cancel
except the six which is what we said and
we can figure out some of the others as
well and see that this formula is
exactly the probability of having K
successes in our n different possible
sort of combinations sorryi n different
trials so the probability of K successes
in n trials given by this formula and
this is exactly how you calculate your
binomial distribution for that if that
is your underlying probability
distribution right so that was only the
second distribution I talked about but
I'm going to stop there for now and I'm
going to see if we've got any questions
for everyone in the chat for the last
sort of 15 minutes or so so if you have
any questions if their probability
related awesome we can talk more
probability but if you have other
questions I'll especially as this is the
last one I'll happily try and take on
anything and everything you want to ask
and see where we end up
so I'll just clean the board and then
I'll come and have a look at what we're
going to be doing
ah Steve hello nice of you to join any
of you don't know that black pen red pen
check out we also made a video together
which I am still editing but will
eventually be shortly released it is a
super super fun right what have we got
here
Galois Theory
III Christ I'll be honest I study very
very basic Galois theory when I was a
third-year undergraduate so that was a
long time ago and I had to have probably
forgotten most of my Galois theory that
I previously learnt so I don't think I
can cover I don't think I can cover that
one you just woke up it's so lazy no I
guess you're in America so I'll let you
off all right well we got favorite
recommended table games okay I've got
another gambling question why is it
called the normal distribution could
probably touch on that what else we got
here topology versus Sigma algebra whoa
okay that is a another very very
advanced question also very nice then
you are you are correct if you roll my
dice you do always get sixes for any of
you that don't know what Ben's
referencing you should watch my my math
speed-dating video with grant from sweet
blue on brown where I had him roll what
I thought was a fair dice I got the dice
from monopoly set I said this in the
video right I got the dice or my
monopoly set grant rolled it and he
seemed to get a six every time uh-huh so
right okay so what we got now okay let's
talk about what should we talk about I'm
gonna say I'm not much of a gambler so
I'm not sure I can really talk about my
favorite or recommended table games I
suppose the only or not the only one of
one interesting you could look at there
is I think if you look at the odds
I've actually playing against a casino
then blackjack or twenty-one is actually
the game where you have the best odds to
win as a player versus the casino itself
that doesn't mean you will win it just
means your odds are as high as they're
going to be the odds are still in favor
of the casino however and if you want to
like get clever about it you can count
cards but of course I'm not sure if it's
illegal but you definitely like gets
thrown out so you knows if you get
caught doing it so I don't know how to
do it for anyone asks but that is
something that that awesome film 21 is
literally the name of the film it's a
really interest I found that really
interesting film because whilst they
don't talk too much about the mattes
just the whole concept of taking math
students and using them to win money and
casinos is quite fun alright why is it
called the dilution okay um I'm going to
imagine again I'm not actually entirely
sure Sam so I think it could just be the
fact that it's like super standard and
covers almost everything that could be
one possible reason that if I had to
guess that would be my guess but it
could also be named after someone or
something
quite possibly I honestly don't know the
history behind it but it's possibly
because I've just mentioned this idea
that it kind of covers everything so we
have this really important theorem that
we have in probability and we use it in
statistics all the time and I actually
was asked this question by Gavin which I
haven't yet answered so I can kind of
briefly touch on it now so Gavin
actually asked me in a message earlier
about the central limit theorem now I'm
assuming some of you may have heard of
this some of you almost certainly won't
have don't worry I'm gonna tell you what
it is and then I'm going to tell you why
it's an important result so the central
limit theorem and this should I think
some give you a feel for why the normal
distribution is so so important and has
so many uses which as I say I think is
maybe why it's called the normal
distribution because it's like the
standard distribution of pretty much
everything so the central limit theorem
is this quality
central limit mm okay so this tells you
if I have a set of data so I'm going to
go out and I'm going to collect some
data from a sample from a from a
population so I'm going to collect lots
and lots of different data points let's
call them x1 x2 all my different samples
up to let's suppose I get n of them up
to XM so I've got n different pieces of
data now I'm going to do and the really
interesting thing about the central
limit theorem it doesn't matter which
probability distribution these have come
from so if I were to go out and sample
you know Heights
for example we kind of know that that's
a normal distribution but if I were to
go out and sample let's say the amount
of time between a phone call at a call
center so this is a fun thing the if you
model the amount of time between a phone
call between successive phone calls at a
call center they follow something called
an exponential distribution which is
kind of has Exponential's in it but that
is definitely not a normal distribution
right so let's suppose these belong to
an exponential distribution or maybe
they belong to a beta distribution or a
gamma distribution or some other
distribution that isn't normal it
doesn't actually matter but you need
them all to be independent so they all
need to be independent so that means
that none of them depend on any of the
others so just because I've taken
sampled X 1 that doesn't in any way
influence the next sample I take X 2 so
as long as my sampling is independent
and all of them have an identical
distribution so again that just means
they're all the same pieces of data so
they're all x between calls of call
center so they're all from exponential
for example so they need identical
distribution then if you have these two
three
then first thing you can do is calculate
something that we call the sample mean
so you take all your data points and
I've got n of them so if I got to
calculate the mean of N Things and
objects you add them all together and
then you just divide by the number of
objects the normal way of calculating an
average calculating a mean so the sample
mean is exactly that it's equal to one
over n times the sum from I equals 1 to
N of the x i's so this is just the mean
value from my sample now the central
limit theorem and this is super cool
tells you that X bar which is this
sample mean sorry I should have said
tells you your sample mean which we
label X bar the central limit theorem
tells you that X bar is approximately
normally distributed with mean equal to
MU which is the mean and variance equal
to Sigma squared over N so we don't need
to worry too much about the things in
there but what the central limit theorem
is telling you is this is true as n goes
to infinity all right so this is the
huge result of the central limit theorem
so I will reiterate exactly why it's so
awesome in a second so what we're doing
here is I'm taking samples taking data
points samples from some underlying
distribution right which can be remember
this can be from any probability
distribution it does not have to be from
a normal distribution it could be
anything and then you take your samples
you calculate the mean value the average
value called x-bar the central limit
theorem then tells you that as n tends
to infinity so as you take more and more
samples your mean actually looks like a
normal distribution so this is so
powerful because it because even though
here all of these X's can be from any
distribution whatsoever
so Poisson binomial geometric
exponential beta T distribution
literally any distribution you can think
of that's where these can be taken but
the central limit theorem says there are
average value there mean value is in
fact a normal distribution as long as n
goes to infinity which is super super
powerful so it kind of tells you that
any probability distribution can be
approximated by a normal distribution as
you let your sample size go to infinity
so this is when I said I think it's
called normal because it kind of covers
everything and it kind of covers
everything because of the central limit
theorem and this relationship my
favorite thing about this is this is a
theoretical probability result so
there's it's a it's a pretty difficult
thing to prove if you've done a
university level course in probability
you would prove the central limit
theorem now when we use this in practice
we're going to make an approximation
with our data and we want to use this
but of course we cannot take an infinite
number of sample points because if we
all right I mean this is not possible
let n actually go to infinity so when
you use this in statistics for actually
doing analysis you actually say this is
true in statistics or n greater than or
equal to 30
which to me is hilarious like so you
have the theory that tells you and has
to tend to infinity but then of course
you can't do that in practice so
statisticians say as long as n is bigger
than 30 as long as I've got more than 30
data points I can assume it's normal and
normally distributed so that's why in
any statistical analysis if they've got
less than 30 data points don't believe
any of the statistics but if you've got
more than 30 then it's probably all
right in general as a rule of thumb okay
what else have we got here ah yes I've
seen that one
my Rick nebula the Marcus's Oh toys TV
show about the crowd about the code is
awesome where he talks about guessing
everyone to guess the number of jelly
beans in the jar and it actually is
normally distributed and the mean is
pretty much bang on the answer yeah
no no that's super cool and anyone who
wants to watch that I'm pretty sure it's
available unlike dailymotion or
something you can watch it online
you don't need BBC iPlayer and it's
really good maths maths on TV love it oh
I think we're out of time Christ that
went quickly ahem Wow okay so guess
that's an hour thank you everyone for
tuning in again asking awesome questions
as always hopefully you've learned some
probability and ie this is it in fact
isn't it for the live stream so this has
been the sixth one called the Tom Knox
mass appeal series so I even though I
might start doing these again but I'm
probably going to take a couple of weeks
off I hope you all don't mind as I and
you've got various other things that
I've got to be getting on with like
mainly my teaching I think my students
are feeling a little bit neglected
because I'm spending all my time talking
to you guys on YouTube so I'm gonna take
a few weeks off but then I might come
back with some more live streams but
obviously I'll post and tell you all
about them if and when they're going to
happen but thank you for tuning in I
hope you've enjoyed them and what you're
asking that is their proof angry Anthony
is it her example and so the that's kind
of a technical detail it's a good
question so I've just told you Oh
statisticians say n is greater than 30
so you if you look at the the technical
proof of the central limit theorem you
get sufficient accuracy when n is
greater than 30 so it's all about how
accurate you want your approximation to
be in short anyway right I will actually
better stop there so again thank you so
much I'll probably do some more but I'll
let you all know about them but
definitely won't be next week I'm taking
a week off gonna enjoy the sunshine that
we have here in England for once
so again
Cheers not easy